---
layout: post
title: On Constrasting Views Of The Enlightnment
date: 2015-08-07T18:39:03-07:00
tags: [philosophy,life,quasi-essay]
status: draft
type: post
published: false
comments: true
author: andrey_kurenkov
excerpt: Why and how this website was created
---








On Contrasting Visions of Enlightenment
By: Andrey Kurenkov
TA: Victor Wanningen









Introduction
Enlightenment, simply understood as a human’s escape from falsehood, has been considered and evaluated throughout history in vastly different ways by such influential thinkers as Plato, Immanuel Kant, Owen Harries, Timothy Leary, and others; of these evaluations, Kant's is the best and most useful to society. The tradition of considering the concept of enlightenment and the role of the enlightened individual informally began with Plato’s Allegory of the Cave. Millennia later, Kant formally defined these concepts in the new context of what contemporary philosophers called “the Age of Enlightenment” and argued for their application towards social reform. An opposing stance was soon taken by Edmund Burke after the tumultuous horrors of the French Revolution drove him to argue for the rejection of rapid social change driven by enlightenment. This position in Burke’s work was later used by Harries to define conservatism and argue against Kant’s philosophy of enlightenment. Completely opposite Burke’s conservatism is Leary’s position, which goes beyond rejecting enlightenment as defined by Kant by radically redefining it and demanding greater social change. A more detailed analysis of these views shows Kant’s position to be most pertinent to today’s societies because it best meets their needs. 
Summary and Comparative Analysis
One of Plato’s great contributions to western philosophy is The Allegory of the Cave, in which enlightenment is symbolically established to be an escape from induced falseness and an eventual responsibility towards overseeing those still in the dark. This allegory is communicated in one of Plato’s classic dialogues, and uses the symbols of a cave to stand for society and of light or its lack to stand for enlightenment or ignorance respectively. In the dialogue Plato begins by describing a cave that people inhabit since childhood, grow up within in chains, and experience with a static view aimed at a wall showing nothing but shadows of objects projected onto it by unknown and ambiguous puppeteers (Plato, 1991, p. 1). This allegorically describes the natural state of most people, who live knowing only falsehood and illusion (seeing only darkness and shadows) in a prison of the mind (the cave) without awareness of true reality (light and the objects casting shadows). Although the people of the cave never know of anything beyond the shadows and are therefore forever ignorant of the truth, Plato considers what will happen to an individual if he were freed from bondage by external “agents of enlightenment” and led outside. Despite at first feeling pain at the sight of light, such an individual will soon acclimate and grow to appreciate the outside world as a truer and better vision of reality than what he was accustomed to (Plato, 1998, p. 2-3). This reflects the existence of rare individuals with inborn wisdom and can thus grow into philosophers aware of the true reality symbolized by the outside of the cave. 
Though it seems most just to share this wisdom with everyone, Plato shows this to be impossible by considering what would happen if the enlightened individual re-entered the cave: he would be judged a fool for seeing the shadows worse than those forever in the cave, and his statements will not only be rejected but cause him to be put to death. With this, Plato implicitly draws a parallel between enlightened individuals and Socrates, Plato’s mentor who was put to death by Athens. He goes on to conclude that such individuals should return to the cave not to enlighten those in the dark but rather to rule over them as a “guardian” (Plato, 1998, p. 6-7). Elitist and undemocratic though this idea is, it is the basis of Plato’s view of the enlightened individual and his role in society. In fact, it forms the basis for Plato’s conception of the ideal state as described out in “The Republic”: in such a state children showing signs of inborn wisdom should be kept from corruption and raised with education so as to encourage their development into enlightened guardians capable of ruling the state for the wellbeing of those unenlightened. Though cynical towards humans, Plato’s conception of enlightenment and the role of the enlightened individual was an important foundation for later thinkers such as Kant.
Unlike Plato’s allegorical and indirect exploration of enlightenment, Kant directly considers the concept in “What is Enlightenment” to the point of explicitly defining it in the first sentence as “man’s release from self incurred tutelage.” Like Plato, Kant states that the majority of mankind suffers from a tutelage which renders them unable to realize the truth and dependant on the words of others, just as the people of the cave could not see for themselves and had only the shadows of real objects. However, unlike Plato, Kant believes that enlightenment is attainable by all people since everyone has the essential capacity to enlighten themselves: reason. Despite this capability, most people willingly subject themselves to be ruled by guardians due to “laziness and cowardice” (Kant, 1963, p. 3). Laziness is naturally understood to be a reason since it is easier to be told the truth than to think of it yourself, and the relevance of cowardice is explained by Kant as by Plato: humans are conditioned by guardians to know only blindness. As the people of the cave are shown only shadows and kept from the light, so the people of Kant’s time are taught not to use their reason and to fear the consequences of transgression. Despite this similarity, Kant again disagrees with Plato in believing that enlightenment can be spread to the public through just freedom of thought and of the public expression of one’s thoughts in all cases. 
Kant also does away with Plato’s faceless puppeteers by directly decrying the guardians holding back enlightenment: the state and the church. For the former, the punishment every common citizen fears for questioning the law as well as the censorship of freethinkers inhibits the use of reason and therefore also enlightenment. Likewise, the latter’s enforcement of doctrines decreed by faith and not subject to logical questioning is completely at odds with any possibility of enlightenment. Though Kant points out the existence of these limiting factors and the fact that humanity has not reached “an enlightened age,” he conversely acknowledges living in an “age of enlightenment” during which greater freedoms are gradually being realized and individual release from tutelage is becoming more feasible (Kant, 1963, p. 8). He emphasizes that the role of an enlightened individual such as him should be that of a scholar unrestricted in the use their reason and able to act as an agent of enlightenment. Religious tyranny is seen by him to as the worst opponent of such agents of enlightenment since the state has no vested interest in restricting artistic expression or scientific inquiry. Furthermore, he endorses the contemporary concept of the enlightened monarch who does not restrict religious freedom and thereby allows for the development of the people towards freedom and of the government towards progressive policy (Kant, 1963, p. 9).  Such philosophical stances by Kant, and by others during his age that strongly embraced a societal and political movement towards enlightenment, in fact did promote sweeping political and societal changes that led other contemporary thinker to reject the project of societal enlightenment.
Owen Harries uses a work by such a contrarian thinker, Edmund Burke’s “Reflections On the Revolution in France”, in his piece “What Conservatism Means” to define and argue for conservatism as a stance opposing Kant’s sweeping social change in favor of at most slow change. Unlike Kant’s partial rethinking of and addition to Plato’s ideas, Harries completely rejects Kant’s claim that a society should progress towards total public enlightenment and argues that social elements constricting the use of reason exist with purpose and cannot be done away with. He provides three reasons to be wary of removing society’s guardians and overturning existing social institutions: the unintended consequences of change, the latent functions of those institutions, and the irrationality of mankind. According to Harries, conservatives such as Burke claim societies are as inconceivably complex as living organisms in that they both have with innumerable interconnections that make predicting all the outcomes of change unrealistic. Those who argue for extreme change with clean and noble theoretical alternatives are therefore foolish to think they can truly predict the outcomes of such changes. Likewise, the complexity of societies means every major social institution has its significant roles to play that are both obvious and hidden, so dismantling such institutions could have further unwanted consequences. Lastly, society cannot be reformed solely through reason because human nature is defined through “accumulated practical knowledge acquired through experience” and is not fundamentally rational as Kant and other Age of Enlightenment thinkers believed (Harries, 2003, p. 14).
Harries’ and conservatives’ alternative to societal change is precisely its opposite: the continuity of society as it is at the present with allowance for most slow incremental change lacking any upheaval or revolution (Harries, 2003, p. 15). This follows from the conservative view of society as an organic structure with historical continuity acting as a sort of evolution, meaning that society exists as it does for good reasons and cannot be bettered through the radical and solely abstract concepts of the Age of Enlightenment. There is therefore no need for enlightened individuals to play a significant role within society since questioning is not helpful and likely hurtful to society.
Timothy Leary likewise rejects Kant’s conception of social enlightenment, but his views are liberal rather than conservative and in fact are far more extreme than those of Kant with regards to overturning social norms. Whereas Kant decried the church and argued for the freedom to use reason and express one’s thoughts as a scholar, Leary equates the universities of his day to Kant’s churches and calls professors “priest-scholars” guilty of conformist thinking that is unable to broach new boundaries (Leary, 1963, p. 34). Scholars are then themselves guardians, and the true agents of enlightenment are likely in jail due to being evolutionary agents with irrationally feared ideas. 
Even this is tame compared to Leary’s rejection of conventional reason as the means of enlightenment. He claims the conception of new ideas is made impossible by the limitations of the mind’s programmed cognitive processes as well as the limitations of established language for expressing concepts not yet in existence.  According to him, these limitations can be overcome only by expanding one’s mind through the use of drugs such as LSD to fundamentally alter the mind’s thought processes. The role of the enlightened individual is thus to break from scholars’ stagnancy by breaching the laws restricting the use of such substances and becoming a proponent of cognitive revolution regardless of society’s resistance. Leary holds that resistance to his ideas is merely the typical reactionary refusal to accept radical social change due to it being too fundamental to be expressed or even understood, and that as with similar past upheavals this resistance will eventually dissipate (Leary, 1963, p. 35-36).
Evaluation
Though all these conceptions of enlightenment as well as the role of the enlightened individual have been influential and have merit, one can be judged to be the best based on how well it enables society to fulfill its purpose of simultaneously encouraging progress (increased well being for citizens) and guarding of stability (existing well being of citizens). Strange and contradictory though it may seem, society should strive to achieve both change and continuity, human history has shown that in the long term humans simply cannot stay constant but rather naturally tend towards greater well being (longer lives, more education, less inequality). Thus it is the role of society to encourage this movement in the most harmonious and non-harmful form possible. 
Of all the conceptions of enlightenment, Kant’s best fits society’s purpose thus defined. Plato’s ideal state ruled by a small group of philosophers kings was progressive for his time for ignoring deities but would achieve stability without the possibility of progress for the majority of the populace. Leary’s view is the complete opposite, in that it would render radical change with little regard for stability and hurt those comfortable with conventional logic as the tool of reason. Harries is less extreme than either due to his allowance for slow change, yet his insistence that societal institutions exist for a reason and cannot be dismantled or radically altered because of ethical or abstract considerations negatively restricts the progress a society can achieve. In particular, long-established systems in which only victims of low-stature benefit from its absolution (such as slavery or limited workers’ rights) would likely be maintained for the sake of normalcy without question or call for change. Kant’s argument for the use of such questioning and reason towards changing society without necessitating revolutionary upheaval combines the best of Harries’ stability and Leary’s progress. Therefore, Kant’s definition of the enlightenment and the enlightened individual are best for being the most fitting and useful in the context of human societies.
Conclusion
Enlightenment, the escape from falsehood, is one of the basic concepts people have considered since Plato’s day. Different thinkers through time have conceived of vastly divergent views of this concept and its role in society, and the four thinkers considered here represent a wide spectrum of opinion on the topic. However, the concept matters not because of superior abstract argumentation but because of its influence on human existence. Therefore, Kant’s position is best due to the fundamental improvements afforded by its application: the end of superstitious discrimination, emphasis on freedom of thought and expression, and overall progress away from the base human state.
References
Immanuel, K., “On History”, e.d. Lewis White Beek, NY: Mcmilland, 1963, 3-10. Retrieved from https://t-square.gatech.edu/access/content/group/XLS0815180928201208.201208/Lecture%20Notes/014_Kant_What-is-Enlightenment.pdf
Plato (1991). “Allegory of the Cave”, Book VII – The Republic, Benjamin Jowett trans., Vintage, Retrieved from https://t-square.gatech.edu/access/content/group/XLS0815180928201208.201208 /Lecture%20Notes/010_Plato_Allegory-of-the-Cave.pdf
Harries, O. (2003, November 17). What conservatism means. Retrieved from https://t-square.gatech.edu/access/content/group/XLS0815180928201208.201208/Lecture%20Notes/015_Harries_What-Conservatism-Means.pdf
Leary, T., & Alpert, R. (1963). The Politics of Consciousness Expansion. The Harvard Review, 1, 33-37. Retrieved from https://t-square.gatech.edu/access/content/group/XLS0815180928201208. 201208/Lecture%20Notes/015_Bloom_Relation-Between-Thought-and-Civil-Society.pdf


